The data used in machine learning
processes often have many variables.
This is what we call
highly dimensional data.
Most of these dimensions may or may not
matter in the context of our application
with the questions we are asking.
Reducing such high dimensions to
a more manageable set of related and
useful variables improves the performance
and accuracy of our analysis.
After this video, you will be able to
explain what dimensionality reduction is,
discuss the benefits of
dimensionality reduction, and
describe how PCA transforms your data.
The number of features or variables
you have in your data set determines
the number of dimensions or
dimensionality of your data.
If your dataset has two features,
than it is two dimensional data.
If it has three features than
it has three features and so on.
You want to use as many features as
possible to capture the characteristics of
your data, but
you also don't want the dimension
audio of your data to be too high.
As the dimensionality increases, the
problem spaces you're looking at increases
requiring substantially more instances
to adequately sample of that space.
So as the dimensionality increases,
the space that you are looking
at grows exponentially.
As the space grows data
becomes increasingly sparse.
In this diagram we see how
the problem space grows as
the dimensionality
increases from 1 to 2 to 3.
In the left plot, we have a one
dimensional space partitioned into four
regions each with size of 5 units.
The middle plot shows a two
dimensional space with 5x5 regions.
The number of regions has
now going from 4 to 16.
In the third plot, the problem space is
three dimensional with 5x5x5 regions.
The number of regions
increased even more to 64.
We see that as the number of dimensions
increases, the number of regions
increases exponentially and
the data becomes increasingly sparse.
With a small dataset relative to the
problem space, analysis results degrade.
In addition, certain calculations used in
analysis become much more difficult to
define and calculate effectively.
For example, distances between samples
are harder to compare since all samples
are far away from each other.
All of these challenges represent
the difficulty of dealing with high
dimensional data and as referred
to as the curse of dimensionality.
To avoid the curse of dimensionality,
you want to reduce
the dimensionality of your data.
This means finding a smaller subset of
features that can effectively capture
the characteristics of your data.
Recall from the lecture on feature
selection part of data preparation is to
select the features to use.
For example, you can a feature that is
very correlated with another feature.
Using feature selection
techniques to select assessitive
features is one approach to
dimensionality reduction.
Another approach to dimensionality
reduction is to mathematically determine
the most important dimension to keep and
ignore the rest.
The idea is to find a smallest
subset of dimensions that
capture the most variation in your data.
This reduces the dimensions of the data
while eliminating the relevant features
making the subsequent analysis simple.
A technique commonly use to find
the subset of most important dimensions is
called principal component analysis,
or PCA for short.
The goal of PCA is to map the data from
the original high dimensional space
to a lower dimensional space that
captures as much of the variation in
the data as possible.
In other words,
PCA aims to find the most useful subset
of dimensions to summarize the data.
This plot illustrates the idea behind PCA.
Here, we have data samples in a two
dimensional space that is defined
by the x axis and the y axis.
You can see that most of the variation in
the data lies along the red diagonal line.
This means that the dat samples are best
differentiated along this dimension
because they're spread out,
not clumped together along this dimension.
This dimension indicated by the red
line is the first principle component
labelled as PC1 in the part.
It captures the large amount of variance
along a single dimension in data.
PC1, indicated by the red line does
not correspond to either axis.
The next principle component is determined
by looking in the direction that is
orthogonal, in other words perpendicular,
to the first principle component which
captures the next largest
amount of variance in the data.
This is the second
principal component PC2 and
it's indicated by
the green line in the plot.
This process can be repeated to find as
many principal components as desired.
Note that the principal components do
not align with either the x-axis or
the y-axis.
And that they are orthogonal, in other
words, perpendicular to each other.
This is what PCA does.
It finds the underlined dimensions,
the principal
components that capture as much of
the variation in the data as possible.
These principal components form a new
coordinates system to transform
the data to, instead of the conventional
dimensions like X, Y, and Z.
So how does PCA help with
dimensionality reduction?
Let's look again in this plot with
the first principle component.
Since the first principle component
captures most of the variations in
the data, the original data sample can
be mapped to this dimension indicated by
the red line with minimum
loss of information.
In this case then,
we map a two-dimensional dataset to
a one-dimensional space while keeping
as much information as possible.
Here are some main points about
principal components analysis.
PCA finds a new coordinate system for
your data,
such that the first coordinate
defined by the first principal
component Captures the greatest
variance in your data.
The second coordinate defined by
the second principal component captures
the second greatest variance in a data,
etc..
The first few principle components that
capture most of the variance in a data
can be used to define
a lower-dimensional space for your data.
PCA can be a very useful technique for
dimensionality reduction,
especially when working
with high-dimensional data.
While PCA is a useful technique for
reducing the dimensionality of your
data which can help with
the downstream analysis,
it can also make the resulting analysis
models more difficult to interpret.
The original features in your data set
have specific meanings such as income,
age and occupation.
By mapping the data to a new coordinate
system defined by principal components,
the dimensions in your transformed
data no longer have natural meanings.
This should be kept in mind when using
PCA for dimensionality reduction.